The SMB Traffic Analyzer Guide
==============================
Holger Hetterich <hhetter@novell.com>
v0.1, May 2010


What is SMB Traffic Analyzer
----------------------------

SMB Traffic Analyzer (from now on called SMBTA) is a software suite utilizing
the Samba CIFS server to create statistics about the data traffic on a Samba
network. SMBTA is made out of several components:

- a module in the VFS (Virtual File System) Layer of Samba
- a system daemon program
- two user oriented programs to visualize the statistics

SMBTA is utilizing a SQL storage to store data about the traffic caused on a
network. By making this data available via SQL, SMBTA is helpful for many
system administrators.

Having knowledge of SQL is not required. The user may also run the client programs
to query the database. These are specialized to the organization of the database,
and are taking away much of the work to translate often needed questions into SQL
statements from the user.

The basic idea and main concept of SMBTA was born on the SambaXP conference
in Göttingen, Germany, in 2007. At the SNIA conference 2008, I was able to
present a prototype of the idea to the Samba team. The code for the module
got immediately accepted and was introduced with Samba 3.2.0 to Samba users.

This document is refering to the version 2.0 of the SMB Traffic Analyzer VFS
module.

Why using SMB Taffic Analyzer
-----------------------------

Samba services may run on special hardware, like RAID systems, or other specialized
storage. With SMBTA, the user can create an overview of the network usage
on the network. SMBTA can be used to answer questions like this:

- Which of my services is the most used one?
- At which time the usage of my service reaches peaks?
- Which service almost never gets used?
- Which users are the highest traffic generators?
- What where the detailed last file activities on a share?
- Which is the top used file be read and write access?

Isn't SMBTA a tool to control employees?
----------------------------------------

Yes it can be used like that, but doesn't need to be. To expose user names
to a storage is even forbidden in many countries. Therefore, SMBTA allows
for anonymization of any data linked to a person.

There are many use cases for SMBTA, like determining and planning hardware for your
services, or analyzing the network before switching to clustered Samba.

The basic concept of SMBTA
--------------------------

The Samba CIFS server features a Virtual File System Layer (VFS), that allows
modules to be linked into the layer, replacing or enhancing the functions
of the VFS. Modules can be linked into and behave completely transparent.

SMBTA makes use of this functionality by adding a module to Samba's
VFS. that is collecting data from prominent VFS functions like write, read,
close etc. 

The collected data will be encrypted, and send over the network to a
receiver program. This daemon program, smbtad, is then building a
SQL storage from the data.

Besides of the generated SQL storage, client programs can be used to
query the storage in a specialized way over the network.


Where to get SMBTA
------------------

The SMBTA VFS module is called vfs_smb_traffic_analyzer.so, and is packaged
with Samba version greater or equal than 3.2.0. However, the current
SMBTA module shipping with Samba is only implementing version 1 of the
SMBTA protocol, and this document is only refering to version 2 of the
protocol. The implementation of vfs_smb_traffic_analyzer.so protocol version 2
can be found in the current master git source tree of Samba. It is expected
to be shipped with Samba 3.6.0.

For the openSUSE Linux distribution, SMBTAv2 has been backported to current
Samba releases, from 3.5.0 and newer. You can retrieve the SMBTAv2 VFS module
from the openSUSE BuildService.

The other parts of SMBTA, the daemon program smbtad, as well as the client
programs smbtaquery and smbtamonitor are available in source code from
the projects homepage ( ... ). For the openSUSE Linux distribution,
RPM packages are available from the openSUSE Build Service.


Building SMBTA from the sources
-------------------------------

The SMBTA tools smbtaquery and smbtamonitor are utilizing cmake as the
primary build tool. To build the tools using cmake, please refer to the
README file delivered with the smbtatools package.


Setting up SMBTA
----------------

Activating the VFS module on Samba Servers
------------------------------------------

In general, the Samba CIFS server is configured via smb.conf, it's main
configuration file. A typical service definition would look like this:

[ExampleShare]
	path = /space

Defining the share "ExampleShare" as a CIFS service, refering to the
path /space on the servers storage.

By extending the share definition with the commands to load the SMBTA
VFS module, SMBTA logging for this service can be activated:

[ExampleShare]
	path = /space
	vfs_objects = vfs_smb_traffic_analyzer
	vfs_smb_traffic_analyzer:version = v2
	vfs_smb_traffic_analyzer:host = example.host.ex
	vfs_smb_traffic_analyzer:port = 3490

By default, SMBTA will use protocol version 1, to not break any existing
installations. Only if the version parameter is given, it will be forced to
use protocol version 2.

The host and port parameters define the hostname of the system that will be
used as the target for the VFS modules data to send. It will try to connect
to the port number given with the parameter port.

Setting up smbtad
-----------------

On the target host of the module, the program smbtad is running. It's task
is mainly to feed a SQL storage out of the data it receives from the module,
maintain the storage and accept requests from clients.

smbtad -i 3490 -p 3491

when running as superuser, this command line will listen to VFS module
connections on port 3490, and listen to client connections on port 3491.

By default, smbtad creates a database as /var/lib/staddb. If the database
already exists, it will use the existing database.

Checking the installation
-------------------------

When everything is set up, move some data on the shares you have activated
the VFS module on. For example, if you write a file to a share,
you can check the installation by looking into the database
directly, involving the sqlite3 command line interface:

sqlite3 /var/lib/staddb
$ select * from write;

You should now see entries of data written by the user you have done
the transfer with. If this works, your SMBTA installation works fine
und you can start pointing more shares to it.

Setting up Encryption
---------------------

For security reasons, SMBTA can encrypt it's data flow from the module
to the smbtad component. This is optional, data is not encrypted by
default.

The encryption method used in SMBTA is 128bit AES. For this encryption,
the user need to generate a key and make the key known to both the
Samba server where the VFS module is activated and the system smbtad is
running on.

To ease the installation of encryption, the Samba server includes a small
utility called smbta-util:

smbta -g keyfile

will generate a key for encryption, activate encryption on the Samba server,
and save the key to a file. The user can then use this file on the smbtad
system and store it in a protected place owned by the superuser.

smbta -u 

will uninstall the key from the Samba server, and deactivate encryption.

To setup the key on the smbtad-system, you run smbtad with this command option:

smbtad --keyfile=/etc/smbtad/key

Using the client programs
-------------------------

smbtaquery
----------

The possibilities to create statistical data out of the data set are
quite wide ranged. Instead of querying the database directly via SQL,
users may use smbtaquery. It is specialized on the setup of the database,
and runs a lot of preconfigured queries to produce statistical and
informational data. smbtaquery is utilizing a simplified language to
operate on the users whish, translates the commands into SQL, and
connects to the smbtad program to run the SQL query. The result is
then printed out.

General usage
-------------

Following is an example of a smbtaquery run:

smbtaquery -h smbtahost.example.ex -i 3491 -q 'global, usage rw;'

The command line option -h (or --host) is telling smbtaquery to use
the given host as the system, where smbtad is running on. When running
queries, it will connect to this system with the port number given with
the command line option -i. 

Finally the command line option -q (or --query) provides the query to
run for the build in interpreter of smbtaquery. More on this follows
in the later chapters.

Utilizing a configuration file
------------------------------

The command line options -h (--host) and -i are required every time
smbtaquery should run a query on the database. Therefore, those
parameters can be stored into a configuration file, which will
automatically be loaded and parsed if it is found. The location of
this file is:

$HOME/.smbtatools/query-config

whereas $HOME is the users home directory.

The format of the file is that of a ini file:

[network]
	hostname = smbtahost.example.ex
	port = 3491


The smbtaquery interpreter
--------------------------

To easy the usage of the database, smbtaquery implements a simplified
language to query the database. It is specialized for SMBTA.

Syntax
------

Every command is seperated by a comma, any paraeters to the command are
seperated by space. The last command ends with a semicolon instead of
a comma.

Here is an example query:

'global, usage rw;'


